Init an article about wrapping glue (#338)
tidyverse/glue: vignettes/wrappers.Rmd

---
title: "How to write a function that wraps glue"
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{How to write a function that wraps glue}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
  collapse = TRUE,
  comment = "#>"
)
```

```{r setup}
library(glue)
```

Imagine that you want to call `glue()` repeatedly inside your own code (e.g. in your own package) with a non-default value for one or more arguments.
For example, maybe you anticipate producing R code where `{` and `}` have specific syntactic meaning.
Therefore, you'd prefer to use `<<` and `>>` as the opening and closing delimiters for expressions in `glue()`.

Spoiler alert: here's the correct way to write such a wrapper:

```{r}

> myglue <- function(..., .envir = parent.frame()) {

Reviewer: Can we find a more compelling example based on one of our glue wrapper? I think it's pretty unusual to want to change the delimiters.

Author: Based on my own experience and, now, from GitHub searches, I don't have any better ideas. People do really do write wrappers to fiddle with the delimiters and I think other examples are probably too exotic.

But if there's a concrete alternative, I'm happy to have a go.

myglue0 <- function(...) {
  glue(..., .open = "@@", .close = "~~")
}
```

From superficial experimentation, `myglue0()` appears to work:

```{r}
fn_def <- "
  @@NAME~~ <- function(x) {
    @@BODY~~
  }"

myglue0(fn_def, NAME = "one_plus_one", BODY = "1 + 1")
```

However slightly more sophisticated and realistic usage of `myglue0()` reveals a big problem.
Here we use `myglue0()` inside another function, `fn_builder0()`:

```{r, error = TRUE}
fn_builder0 <- function(NAME, BODY) {
  fn_def <- "
    @@NAME~~ <- function(x) {
      @@BODY~~
    }"
  myglue0(fn_def)
}

fn_builder0("two_times_two", "2 * 2")
```

What do you mean `NAME` is not found?!?
It's one of the arguments of `fn_builder0()`.
It should be "two_times_two".

## Where does `glue()` evaluate code?

What's going on?
It's time to look at the (redacted) signature of `glue()`:

```{r, eval = FALSE}
glue(..., .envir = parent.frame(), ...)
```

The expressions inside a glue string are evaluated with respect to `.envir`, which defaults to the environment where `glue()` is called from.

Let's make new artificial versions of our functions that make it easy to tell where the inner `glue()` call is getting its values.

```{r}

> myglue1 <- function(...) {

Reviewer: I think this would be easier to explain first, before you introduce all the complexities of a real example. Maybe something like this:

```R
x <- 0

myglue1 <- function(...) {
  x <- 1
  myglue2(...)
}

myglue2 <- function(...) {
  x <- 2
  glue::glue(...)
}

myglue2("{x}")
```

Reviewer: Or maybe:

```R
x <- 0
y <- 0
z <- 0

myglue1 <- function(...) {
  x <- 1
  y <- 1
  myglue2(...)
}

myglue2 <- function(...) {
  x <- 2
  glue::glue(...)
}

myglue2("{x} {y} {z}")
```

  NAME <- "myglue_execution_env"
  glue(..., .open = "@@", .close = "~~")
}

fn_builder1 <- function(NAME, BODY) {
  fn_def <- "
    @@NAME~~ <- function(x) {
      @@BODY~~
    }"
  myglue1(fn_def)
}
```

Let's also strategically define `BODY` in the global environment

```{r}
BODY <- "global_env"
```

Now let's call our function builder and observe which values are being used for `NAME` and `BODY`:

```{r}
fn_builder1(NAME = "user_NAME", BODY = "user_BODY")
```

Neither `NAME` nor `BODY` is getting the values that our user provided in the call to `fn_builder1()`!

That's because the innermost call to `glue()` is looking in these places, in this order, for `NAME` and `BODY`:

1. The ephemeral execution environment of our glue wrapper, `myglue1()`. Here `NAME` has the value "myglue_execution_env" there and that explains part of our result.

> 2. The environment where `myglue1()` is defined, which is the global environment. `BODY` has the value "global_env" there and that explains the rest of our result.

Reviewer: glue uses `eval()` so yes, you're right, it just follows the standard environment stack. No special behaviour here.

Spoiler alert: here's the correct way to write such a wrapper:

```{r}

> my_glue <- function(..., .envir = parent.frame()) {

Reviewer: Might be worth a footnote pointing out that this is the same pattern you use in `abort()`/`cli_abort()` wrappers? And in `defer()`?

Author: I was thinking the same! I added a sentence in the intro. I think it's worthy to point this out.

If you'd like to understand why this is the way, keep reading.

## Working example

Here's an abbreviated excerpt of the roxygen comment that generates the documentation for the starwars dataset in dplyr:

```r

> #' \describe{

Reviewer: This example is much better!

#' \item{name}{Name of the character}
#' \item{height}{Height (cm)}
#' \item{mass}{Weight (kg)}
#' \item{species}{Name of species}
#' \item{films}{List of films the character appeared in}
#' }
```

To produce such text programmatically, the first step might be to generate the `\item` lines from a named list of column names and descriptions.
Notice that `{` and `}` are important to the `\describe{...}` syntax, so this is an example where it is nice for glue to use different delimiters for expressions.

Put the metadata in a suitable list:

```{r}
sw_meta <- list(
  name    = "Name of the character",
  height  = "Height (cm)",
  mass    = "Weight (kg)",
  species = "Name of species",
  films   = "List of films the character appeared in"
)
```

Define a custom glue wrapper and use it inside another helper that generates `\item` entries[^1]:

> [^1]: We're using `<@` and `@>` as the delimiters because this vignette is authored using R Markdown and knitr. The delimiters `<<` and ``>>` actually have special meaning in knitr, so it was easiest to use something else.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^1]: Note that delimiters `<<` and ``>>` have special meaning in knitr, so if you're generating output for RMarkdown or Quarto, you should avoid them.
```

```{r}
my_glue = function(...) {
  glue(..., .open = "<@", .close = "@>", .envir = parent.frame())
}

named_list_to_items <- function(x) {

>   my_glue("\\item{<@names(x)@>}{<@x@>}")

Reviewer: Now that I think of it, is there a reason to not do just `<` and `>`?

Author: That would work in this exact example, but I don't want to model that in a vignette. I know some folks will copy exactly what they see here and I think `<` and `>` are too likely to collide with text in the template that should not get evaluated. Generally speaking.

Reviewer: What about `((` or `[[`? I'm just thinking that `<@` looks hard to type.

Author: Well all of those come up a lot in real R code (like, the code you might want to evaluate) so again I shied away from them. It really sucks that you can't use `<<`. You can't even triple them `<<<` because that also matches knitr's regex (unintentionally, I think).

The expressions inside a glue string are evaluated with respect to `.envir`, which defaults to the environment where `glue()` is called from.

> Everything is simple when evaluating `glue()` in the global environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Everything is simple when evaluating `glue()` in the global environment:
```
